
# Peer production adaptation paper
*By Pei-Chih Chao*



## Introduction

In this article, I am trying to find ways of working inspired by peer production. I compare the case of “KM” to the concepts and features of peer production. From the comparison, we can see how the people work together on a shared center, “KM”, and how it grows in the ways inspired by peer production. Moreover, “KM”, as an internal knowledge management database, could face less challenge than most peer production projects because the contributors work in the same company and they have many traditional ways to communicate with each other. Last, I compare “KM” to git to understand the importance of version control.

## Case Description

I conducted an online interview with a friend named Sugo, who is a senior storage system engineer in Silvershine Technology Inc based in Taipei, Taiwan. In his company, there is an internal knowledge management database is called “KM.” The workers in the company can find useful technical documents from “KM.” Also, Sugo mentioned that “KM” is hosted on internal servers, and applies basic HTML to link the technical documents and PDF files.

Not only engineers but also product managers and sales will use “KM” every day. Product managers will share the updated knowledge by “KM” with all the engineers and sales. Sales can find flyers or product descriptions before they need to introduce a new product to their client. The head of engineers will update the new technical document if he receives any from the technical team of their manufacturers. The rest of the engineers share the problems and solutions that they had encountered when they provided on-site service.

For the interviewee, as an engineer, he can always choose to update and edit the topics which he has some insights to share or he is interested in. However, sometimes, his manager will ask the senior engineers to update a particular topic, which could be a potential problem to help other engineers. Recently, he shares a standard operating procedure (SOP) of setting the storage system. He believes that, with his share, his colleagues will feel more comfortable to set up the storage because the process can make you nervous if you have to set it up in front of the clients’ eyes. Following the SOP in this scenario can be helpful.

Additionally, the interviewee mentioned that he learned a lot from the documents shared by his colleagues. Most of the engineers did not have any relevant knowledge about storage system before onboard because there are not many educational institutions which will teach storage system. He feels that the knowledge of the storage system is not that popular compared to servers or the internet. Even though he is a senior engineer right now, he cannot explain every detail clearly why the storage system works this way. But, through “KM,” he can learn from his colleagues with different backgrounds and enhance his knowledge.

When there is a conflict or the content needed to be updated, the product manager and the head of the engineer will have a short meeting and discuss how to deal with it. The product manager has to provide the official solution from manufacturers, but the official solution does not work every time because the client’s environment is variable. Therefore, the head of the engineer can share the on-site experience of the whole team with the product manager and find out the solution which fits for them. Moreover, no one takes the responsibility to format the documents or create the rules. If someone cannot understand the content, he or she will ask the creator. And maybe the creator will update the document if something is confusing or wrong.

Last but not least, the interviewee mentioned that the engineering team is planning to create a responsive interface for “KM” since it is hard to check the content by mobile phone. Furthermore, he also said that they should do version control, but now, what they do is deleting the out-of-date content and adding the update documents. So, if they, unfortunately, need the previous version of the documents, they need to look for who has the document on his or her own computers right now.

## Compared to the concepts of peer production

In this part, I am trying to compare the concept of peer production and what I see in the case of “KM.”

To clarify what peer production is, according to the article, Peer Production and Cooperation, peer production combines three core characteristics: (a) decentralization of conception and execution of problems and solutions, (b) harnessing diverse motivations, and (c) separation of governance and management from property and contract.[^1]

First, in part of the “KM” case, I see decentralization. That is, all of the colleagues in the company can devote their efforts to “KM.” Engineers and product managers provide technical or business documents. Even though sales do not provide much content, they act as proofreaders in this case. If sales cannot understand some concepts mentioned in the documents, they can ask for help from engineers or product managers. This process can help to find some points in the materials needed to be clarified. However, in the interview, the interviewee mentioned that the head of engineers would assign senior engineers to update a particular part if he thinks it is necessary. A hierarchical organization is not a feature of peer production. However, a private company, it is understandable that the manager wants to lead his team to function efficiently.

Second, “KM” harnesses the diverse motivations. In other words, people with different jobs can achieve their goals through “KM.” Product managers want sales to understand the products. The more the sales understand, the more significant the opportunity, the products can be sold. Not only clients select the products but also sales choose the products which they consider easy to sale. Product managers will provide as much information as they can on “KM” to make sure once sales want to sale their products, he or she can access the needed content about the products. For sales, “KM” can help them to do better in customer services. If their clients need some flyers or spec of the products, searching on “KM” is a better way than Google it. For engineers, they could share their on-site installation experience on “KM” to benefit other engineers. Also, the shared experience is a part of the feedback to let product managers understand what kinds of help they need from the manufacturers. As above mentioned, product managers, sales, and engineers all have different motivations to interact with “KM,” and this platform performs well to respond to the needs.

Third, property and contracts are hard to discuss in this case. Although “KM” is hosted on an internal server of the company, no one claims that he or she owns “KM.” The company seems to own the server but not “KM” itself. Furthermore, when we try to discuss governance and management in this case, the managers in this company only point out the parts should be updated but not try to manage the whole “KM” looks like.

Last, according to the article, these components make peer production practices highly adept at learning and experimentation, innovation, and adaptation in rapidly changing, persistently uncertain and complex environments.[^2] In this case, “KM” provide a buffer for the workers in different positions. Without “KM,” every time the storage system cannot be installed successfully, there will be confrontations. Engineers may blame product managers do not provide an updated document from manufactures and make engineers cannot perform well. However, “KM” helps them to document the problem they have encountered, and the engineers may find some solutions which are not in the official documents. These solutions are also valuable for product managers because this kind of technical feedback is what manufacturers want to hear in the monthly meeting.

## Compared to the challenges in peer production

Coordination can be a huge problem in peer production. According to “Two bits,” coordination is important because it collapses and resolves the distinction between technical and social forms into a meaningful whole for participants. On the one hand, there is the coordination and management of people; on the other, there is the coordination of source code, patches, fixes, bug reports, versions, and distributions — but together there is a meaningful tech no social practice of managing, decision-making, and accounting that leads to the collaborative production of complex software and networks. [^3] Also, in the article, Collaboration through open superposition: A theory of the open source way, the observation that the success of FLOSS and other forms of open collaboration is surprising because they face three well-known challenges to organizing: complex work, working at a distance, and working with volunteers. Working at a distance, outside formal organizations, already sacrifices many traditional sources of control and motivation. Relying on self-motivated volunteers reduces the relevance of these, but creates the challenge of trying to find a way to organize that draws together relatively independent work into a cohesive, complex, and valuable whole, while maintaining a fertile ground for volunteerism.[^4]

In this case, coordination is not a huge problem for “KM.” To begin with, most of the content providers and the users of “KM” are working in the same office. Although some of them work in the Beijing office, they can contact with each other. Also, most of the time, people can choose the part they are interested in to contribute, and the jobs do not require them to contribute to “KM.” In this perspective, the contributors of “KM” can be considered as volunteers. However, the volunteers in the case of “KM” are easier to control because they work in the same company, and they know each other. The relationship between volunteers is more steady and stronger than other cases such as Wikipedia or open-source software. Moreover, it is hard to define whether “KM” is an intricate work or not because the contributions seem not complex: share the knowledge that you got. But, “KM” as a buffer and also a shared center between different departments, fulfilling the goal which no single person can achieve.

“KM” does not provide a user-friendly interface since it even does not offer a responsive interface. Nonetheless, the value of content in “KM” is too high that people cannot stop using it and compromise with the unfriendly interface. Most tax systems or other websites hosted by the government in the world have the same issue. It is worth to discuss that if people will be more willing to devote to a project with a better interface and if the quality of the contribution will be higher than before.

## Compared to git

At the end of the interview, the interviewee also mentioned that “KM” does not apply any method to do version control. Without version control, when they try to retrieve the previous version of documents, it could be a disaster. Also, without version control, collaboration seems impossible on “KM.” You need to notify everyone in the office that you are going to update a document and ask them do not delete it or modify it at the same time. Furthermore, history is essential because the records help people to understand why the document looks like this today. Checking the full history and read the comments by previous contributors are helpful to understand the updating process. Last, one of the features of git is backup. Everyone could have a copy on their computers, and they do not have to search the machines to know if any previous document still exists!  


[^1]: Benkler, Y. Y. Benkler, Peer Production and Cooperation, forthcoming in JM Bauer & M. Latzer (eds.), Handbook on the Economics of the Internet, Cheltenham and Northampton, Edward Elgar. Peer Production and Cooperation, 1.

[^2]: Benkler, Y. Y. Benkler, Peer Production and Cooperation, forthcoming in JM Bauer & M. Latzer (eds.), Handbook on the Economics of the Internet, Cheltenham and Northampton, Edward Elgar. Peer Production and Cooperation, 1.

[^3]: Kelty, C. M. (2008). Two bits: The cultural significance of free software. Duke University Press.

[^4]: Howison, J., & Crowston, K. (2014). Collaboration Through Open Superposition: A Theory of the Open Source Way. _Mis Quarterly_, _38_(1), 47.