# Application of Principles of Peer Production to the Distributed Proofreaders Project

## Introduction

With the growing popularity of the internet and increasing number of connected users, peer production has emerged as an innovative form of organization (Benkler). Though most commonly found in open source software, open source principles have permeated to projects outside of software. One example of such a project is Distributed Proofreaders (DP). DP helps proofread and correct errors from optical character recognition (OCR) performed on books to be published on Project Gutenberg (Lessig). The contributors of the site together have digitized over 37000 works (Cantoni). To gain insight into the inner workings of the project, two interviews were conducted with Sharon Joiner, a long-time volunteer now part of the board. One set of questions was asked in written form through email and another set was asked in an in-person conversation. Though the core task of processing scanned pages is not an open source software project, DP embodies many of the principles of open source and peer production.

## Distributed Proofreaders as a Collaborative Effort

The project was started in October 2000 by a volunteer of Project Gutenberg who wanted to set up a site "that would allow people to contribute as little as a page a day … so that people can contribute, but not have to do a whole book all by themselves" (Joiner). The books processed are all in the public domain. Joiner elaborates that proofreading in the context of DP "actually bears more resemblance to transcription verification ... we don't correct the grammar or spelling in books that were published long ago."

Benkler states that peer production "combines three core characteristics: (a) decentralization of conception and execution of problems and solutions, (b) harnessing diverse motivations, and (c) separation of governance and management from property and contract." Distributed Proofreaders has different roles for volunteers. These roles are acquired as users gain more experience on the site. Different participants of the project contribute content, proofread, format, and manage the processing of a book. Volunteers take care of pages independently, distributing the effort of processing an entire work to make it more manageable. The different volunteers have different motivations: Joiner found out about the project because of a personal interest at first and continued because of a strong belief in the mission. The project also has separated management of property from governance. The content produced by the project is in the public domain and volunteers are loosely affiliated. DP is a form of Benkler's commons-based peer production as it does not have a firm that enforces proprietary claims on the content and production.

It is also interesting to note that DP exhibits a lot of the features of Crowston and Fagnot's user-generated content. The contributors are numerous in nature--at the time of writing there are over 143000 registered users ("Member List." DP), contributions aren't paid and operate on a volunteer basis, and the contributors work collectively to develop new digitizations to be published on Project Gutenberg where they can be accessed by a wide audience.

Howison and Crowston state that conditions under which adapting open source principles would work fall under three categories: "(1) attributes of the object of work, (2) irrevocable openness, and (3) time." The work done by DP fulfills the requirements for the attributes of the object of work by splitting a book into pages (layerability), manipulation of text files through the browser (low instantiation costs), and being shared in electronic form online (low distribution costs). By operating exclusively on works in the public domain and open sourcing the software used, DP allows for irrevocable openness. Finally, by having participants with time available outside or instead of traditional employment, the project also checks off the third condition of time.

## Distribution of Duties Among Volunteers

Volunteers of DP have different roles and have the possibility to rise through the ranks as they add contributions and accrue time spent on the site. Content that is being worked on passes through several different levels of users until it is ready to be published on Project Gutenberg. When users first register for an account, they start at "the P1 level and/or a task [called] Smooth Reading" and "P1 proofers are not expected to have any prior experience -- just to want to help and be willing to learn what that means" (Joiner). After meeting the requirements of time spent on the site, having contributed a minimum page count, and passing quizzes, users can gain access to higher levels and additional privileges.

Content providers make sure that books are cleared as being in the public domain, and then separate the work into pages for further processing. Project managers "[shepherd] the project through the three proofreading and two formatting rounds, and [know] enough about the proofreading and formatting guidelines to be able to answer questions asked in the project discussion" (Joiner). Note that while content providers have to add the content first, proofreaders are generally able to decide on the projects they want to help digitize. This is contrasted by the traditional model of work done in a company where employees are assigned the work that need to work on.

Similar to how "patches submitted by open source project members go through a formalized form of evaluation before acceptance/rejection" as described by Shaikh and Henfridsson, pages in DP also go through a formalized process of evaluation as they pass through several layers of volunteers that evaluate the work done by the previous volunteer. Because DP strives for a high level of quality of the works it publishes, it also has developed layers of management similar to those in Linux described by Shaikh and Henfridsson.

## Participant Motivation

Joiner describes that she was looking for a quote from a book that was available on Project Gutenberg and "thought that helping provide content for PG sounded like a cool thing to do." While not initially motivated to join the project, Joiner "realized that [she] was much more likely to see things finish if [she] joined and was part of the process." Under Shah's motives for initial participation, this is not unlike the need-driven reason of reciprocity and desire for future improvements. After having been part of DP for more than ten years, it is a strong belief in the mission of the project that motivates her. Supporting literacy and making information available more freely were two major reasons cited. This would qualify as "somewhat internal" motivation (identification) as it is a "conscious valuing of activity" and "self-endorsement of goals" (Ryan and Deci).

DP is open to contributions from new members and makes the process of joining the project easy by reserving certain pages for new members. This makes the project more similar to Raymond's Bazaar model than his Cathedral model, as it encourages participation from new members and is open to contributions from those with little experience.

Joiner started as a regular volunteer, but has since taken on other roles in the management level of the project, and currently tests software changes. While she does have a programming background, Joiner does not program or currently work a traditional job in addition to her contributors to DP. On the contrary, she states that "this is something I can do because I am not working at a paying job." She does, however, mention that there are other participants in this collaborative effort that do work regular jobs alongside being a volunteer. Asked about their motivations, she states that another developer probably works on the project because of personal enjoyment and belief in the mission. This is similar to the hobbyists identified by Shah that "choose their own tasks and set their own schedules."

Although not explicitly mentioned in interviews, participants might also be motivated by "somewhat external" factors. The different "ranks" of volunteers allow for participants to gain approval from others (as described by Ryan and Deci) by having a higher placement in the hierarchy.

## Governance

Joiner explains that DP has a board that deals with raising money when needed and sets policy, but it also hires a general manager that runs day-to-day operations. The manager has site admins and project facilitators working under her that take on different duties. While these are aspects of a formal meritocracy as defined by Gardler and Hanganu, the general manager is a "benevolent dictator" as they make all major decisions and have the final say when needed. Unlike the dictator in other projects examined in the article, the general manager from DP does not "maintain control throughout the entire life of the project" as they can resign and be replaced by the board. Most of the concerns of the board are those in the long run: making sure there is enough money to keep the project running, dealing with long-term goals, policy changes, and choosing a new general manager when needed. Similar to how Fogel observes that "Politics are inevitable whenever people have to cooperatively manage a shared resource," Joiner also states that she thinks that organizational challenges will always be and have been present from the start.

## Forking

Gardler and Hanganu state that "One of the strengths of the open source licensing model is that anyone has the right to take the code and develop it independently of the copyright holder … [and] it is possible for those who fundamentally disagree with the controlling influences to start a new project." DP has undergone such forks in the past: DP Canada was formed in 2007 (DPC) as they wanted to take on works that were in the public domain in Canada, but not in the US (the location of the original DP). Changes were made to the forked copy to adapt it to the needs of the forked project.

## Software Used for Collaboration and Communication

The bulk of the work done by Distributed Proofreaders takes place in an interface built by the creators of the project specifically for this task. In it, a scan of the page to be processed is shown at the top along with a text box pre-populated with the OCR'd content below. Contributors correct errors at this stage. Later on, their texts will undergo formatting changes, be proofread by other members of the community, and then finally receive the green light to be published on Project Gutenberg. The custom software operates on plain text files and uses inline markup to indicate formatting. Once one stage of the proofreading process has been completed, it is moved from IN PROGRESS to DONE ("Standard Proofreading Interface Help."). In a way, this is similar to the transition between staged and committed states in git. Progress on the pages is also made incrementally: instead having one person finish a page in its entirety, scanned content undergoes rounds of proofreading and formatting from different volunteers. This mirrors the way that open source software is improved incrementally by having multiple authors commit changes to the same area of source code.

The bulk of communication between participants takes place in a phpBB forum as part of the project. Both communication between regular participants and administrators can be found there. There is also a Jabber conference room and a Slack team. The latter is mostly used for administrative manners and valued as a more real-time communication medium as opposed to the slower forums. Mailing lists are used exclusively by staff and not as a means of communication back-and-forth between members. The project also maintains a wiki hosted using the MediaWiki software. Note that all of the major software used (the self-built main application, phpBB, and MediaWiki) is written in PHP.

## Conclusion

Though Distributed Proofreaders isn't strictly an open source software project, it does have several similarities to other forms of peer production discussed in class. It fits the model of Benkler's peer production, Howison and Crowston's open source principles, and Crowston and Fagnot's user-generated content by having decentralized participants with different motivations producing free content as a collective. By observing the inner workings of DP we can see many traits inherited from open source development that make it a successful collaborative effort by bringing together numerous participants in a way that is able to produce a long list of high quality digitizations of public domain documents.

## Bibliography

- "About This Site." Distributed Proofreaders Canada (DPC), https://www.pgdpcanada.net/c/default.php.
- Benkler, Yochai. "Peer production and cooperation." Handbook on the Economics of the Internet (2016).
- Cantoni, Linda. "Distributed Proofreaders Turns 19." Hot off the Press, 1 Oct. 2019, https://blog.pgdp.net/2019/10/01/distributed-proofreaders-turns-19/.
- Crowston, K., & Fagnot, I. (2018). Stages of motivation for contributing user-generated content: A theory and empirical test. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 109, 89–101.
- Fogel, Karl. "Chapter 8. Managing Participants.” Producing Open Source Software, https://producingoss.com/en/managing-participants.html.
- Gardler, Ross, and Gabriel Hanganu. “Governance Models.” OSS Watch, 15 Feb. 2010, http://oss-watch.ac.uk/resources/governancemodels.
- Howison, J., & Crowston, K. "Discovery: Participation Observation" in (2014). Collaboration through open superposition: A theory of the open source way. MIS Quarterly, 38(1), 29–50.
- Joiner, Sharon. Personal interviews. 8 Oct. 2019 and 11 Oct. 2019.
- Lessig, Lawrence. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy. Penguin Books, 2009.
- "Member List." Distributed Proofreaders (DP), https://www.pgdp.net/c/stats/members/mbr_list.php.
- Raymond, Eric S. The Cathedral and the Bazaar. http://www.catb.org/esr/writings/cathedral-bazaar/cathedral-bazaar/.
- Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations: Classic Definitions and New Directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(1), 54–67.
- Shah, S. K. (2006). Motivation, governance, and the viability of hybrid forms in open source software development. Management Science, 52(7), 1000–1014.
- Shaikh, M., & Henfridsson, O. (2017). Governing open source software through coordination processes. Information and Organization, 27(2), 116–135.
- "Standard Proofreading Interface Help." Distributed Proofreaders (DP), https://www.pgdp.net/c/faq/prooffacehelp.php?i_type=0.
