# Community Participation Experience Report
### Caifan Du  
#### April 28, 2018

When I was hesitating between WikiProjects, I already began to build up my expectation by evaluating the possible costs and gains of participation. I chose a project with rich but manageable complexity, as it could signal more community dynamics and I was anticipating sufficient findings for completing a strong experience report. Though, the perceived barriers are manifold: the complex infrastructure and organizational structure of the project and the obscure work process. Perhaps the most baffling barrier is a discussion on the top of the project talk page, titled as “Future of the project?”. Triggered by the leaving of a project leader, the four-month talk among core members uncovers the differentiated understanding of external forces, like opponent voices and the Wikimedia Foundation, and internal issues, for instance, how to improve the task breakdown by redesigning the existing algorithmic process. The disagreements exhibited in the public communication reduced the perceived reliability of the project but my motivation was more than serving the community and higher possibility of group tension could merely boost my expectation.

To accomplish the task, I first tried manually fixing errors without using algorithmic tools. The actual work process takes the following steps: 1) Pick an error category from an automatically generated error list by several programs; 2) Pick a page with detected error in the sublist; 3) Locate the error in the article; 4) Fix the error by editing wiki text; 5) Publish the change; 6) Go back to the error list and mark the page as “done”. I failed at step 2, 3, 4 separately and missed step 6 twice in several edits. Reasons for these failures are: uncomfortably editing an article with unfamiliar content; inexistence of the suggested error; to fix the error is time-consuming but of limited significance; the lengthy process makes it easy to omit steps. The manual editing experience is quite demotivating, so I soon turned to the algorithmic tools.

The software and scripts recommended by the project affect my editing practice in strikingly different ways. I failed to use AutoWikiBrowser ([version 5.9; "Wikipedia: AutoWikiBrowser", 2017](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:AutoWikiBrowser)) and AutoFormatter (["User: TMg/autoFormatter", n.d.](https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:TMg/autoFormatter)) because the former only accepts senior editors as users and I do not have enough knowledge in Java to set up the latter. WPCleaner  ([version 1.43; "Wikipedia: WPCleaner", 2017](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WPCleaner)) expedites my work by automating step 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 in the manual checking process. It detects errors and suggests modifications and I just need to confirm the change. But once I made a wrong judgment and could not revert the edit by the software. I had to go to the page on Wikipedia and manually fix the mistake. This troublesome experience really discouraged my use. Besides, it isolates me from the familiar environment of Wikipedia and makes me feel less connected to the community. In contrast, the script AutoEd (["Wikipedia: AutoEd", n.d.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:AutoEd)) can be embedded in each article page. It highlights syntactic errors and presents suggested change with comparisons to the original text. I can integrate the checking practice into my regular use of Wikipedia by simply running the script every time after I read an article. Another tool (["User: Hedonil/XTools", n.d.](https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Hedonil/XTools)) which shows the statistics of each page (e.g., pageviews, revisions, editors, etc.), though does not directly assist the editing but creates a sense of community by making visible the traces of other users. It actually has increased my editing practices.

The actual work process is restructured through my selective use of the tools and I finished more tasks smoothly than I expected. I also have had a glance at the Wikipedia behind the scenes and obtained some helpful tools to enhance my experience on Wikipedia as bonuses during the participation. Naturally, my engagement in the community is encouraged by the positive outcome, so I would like to stay and now have new expectations for further exploration.

### Reference
Wikipedia: AutoEd (n.d.). Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:AutoEd.

Wikipedia: AutoWikiBrowser (2017). Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:AutoWikiBrowser.

Wikipedia: WPCleaner (2017). Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WPCleaner.

User: Hedonil/XTools (n.d.). Wikimedia. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:AutoEd.

User: TMg/autoFormatter (n.d.). Wikimedia. Retrieved from https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:TMg/autoFormatter.
