On Huijiwiki platform, I did two things, one was to optimize the existing entry, and the other was to edit and publish a new entry by myself.

The entire writing process is actually not as easy as I thought. First, after registering for an account, each participant must learn the entry editing guide and complete the corresponding tests before they can get permissions. One of the interesting things about this platform is that it will list all the entries that need to be edited in a separate column on the homepage, just like posting a reward announcement for "hunters". In this platform, each participant is a "hunter", but the weapon in their hands is a keyboard instead of a gun, and their hunting object is exactly the entry that needs perfection, or the information that players need but is vacant. Since I didn't have similar experience before, my intention is to start by optimizing and editing the terms that others already have. I put my eyes on the entry of the Gunbreaker. Gunbreaker refers to a hero class in the game that has just been updated. When I clicked in, I found that the problem of this entry is text description of hero skills is too simple. For example, players cannot know the trigger conditions of certain skills through the existing text, and they cannot understand the precondition.

To the right of each entry and title is a blue edit link. Click the pencil-shaped link to open the visual editor, and click the bracket-shaped link to open the code editor. Simply add and adjust text editing content. You can directly use the visual editor, which is similar to Microsoft Word in operation, which is very convenient. The use of visualization tools made me quickly complete my first editing task, which is very friendly to people like me who are new to entry editing. Two days later, my newly edited entry passed the review, indicating that I have basically mastered it.

So I wanted to try to create a new entry-editing a new side mission entry in the game. Compared to the previous time, the visualization tool is not enough to complete this task, because the new entry means format adjustment and the use of more complex templates. At this time, you must use a code editor. The Huijiwiki platform provides a lot of source code for editors. For example, when you need to mention an NPC in the text, you need to use template code: {{map | map name | x coordinate | y coordinate | z coordinate | name = NPC's name}} . When you need to mention a game's props in the text (common props, quest props are not in this column), or when referring to a game's quest, you need to use templates to add icons, links and floating information boxes to the props or quest . For example, {{item | item name}} and {{query | query name}}.

In fact, I may have tried more than a dozen entries before I passed the review. Because there are two very important principles written on the Huijiwiki platform, one is the authenticity of the data, and the other is the handling criteria. On the one hand, every writer must guarantee the authenticity and rigor of the content. If you don’t know the knowledge when you write it, you can't trust any single information, you must refer to multiple sources, check in the game, or ask players who may know you. So when I first started writing, I made a lot of mistakes in details. I took the subjectively determined things for granted and naturally did not escape the eyes of the reviewers. On the other hand, the platform encourages writers to contribute More innovative things, even if the participants refer to Chinese materials (even the old wiki) at the time of writing, they hope that they try to avoid copying and pasting as much as possible, and have to reintegrate with their own understanding. In addition, some rules of Huijiwiki are a little unexpected to me. For example, "When using pictures, if the pictures are official information, their screenshots in the game, and icons in the game data package, you don't need to quote them." This may be the platform for games. There are official reasons for cooperation.

In this experience, many things were unexpected, such as the time spent. Because I haven’t edited entries in other wiki platforms before, it was actually difficult when I first edited the entry. At first, it took me a long time to edit a term, but the pass rate was very low. The process is completely different from what I thought before. The other is that when everyone edited an entry together, there was not a lot of conflicts of opinion as I expected and the progress was not smooth. The participants (players) on the platform were full of inclusiveness. Although such work is considered unpaid labor, their love for games drives them forward. The advantage of peer production is greater than I thought.