---
title: "Peer Production Participation Project"
subtitle: "The experience report: participating and describing the participation in MDN"
author: Pei-Chih Chao
output: html_document
---

*Citation Format: APA*

Nowadays, many developers find their ways to contribute to the community. Some developers spend their time and knowledge to code for good; Some help more people to join the community by creating more comfortable ways to learn how to code. Most developers start their careers by following several tutorials to create "Hello, World!" programs, and I am no exception. Therefore, I always expect that I can help others, too. That is the reason why I choose to be a part of the MDN (Mozilla Developer Network) community, and I would like to devote my language ability to translate the content from English to Traditional Chinese.

When writing the identification report, I have carefully studied the writing guidelines. Thus, I felt confident before I hit the button to start editing. According to Bryant et al. (2015), "the ease of editing a page played an important part in allowing novices to make the initial transition from reader to editor" (p. 5). The button is on the upper right corner, and people can launch editing mode easily through the button. However, after I hit the button, everything is changed. In the editing mode, you can see details of recent versions and an online editor. When the first time I opened the editing mode, I was shocked because I cannot believe that I was going to write some paragraphs as a part of the content. So, I hastily escaped from the webpage by closing the tab, which is not even the right way to log out. After my first experience, it is necessary to modify the tactic, and I decided to start from proofreading.

“According to the helping theory, the first step in volunteering is becoming aware of the project's need for help” (Crowston & Fagnot, 2018, p. 91). In the case of MDN, people can find that there are notifications on the top or under the sidebar of webpages to tell other potential contributors that the page needs help. As a reviewer, you can open the editing mode and start editing. In the end, the reviewer would be asked to confirm if the content still needs more help, and to describe what you have done to the content. Most contributors would leave a short message to point out which parts they have updated. Some explained the reason why they thought the updated version is better than before to help other contributors understand your motivations and goals. In fact, doing proofreading helps me become more familiar with the writing styles. Also, after I read more paragraphs, I could feel there is a tone between different sections. Furthermore, I believe the tone is essential to be successful in doing the translation, but a "right" tone is hard to describe by words in the guideline.

To translate the first paragraph was difficult for me. I wanted to maintain the high quality of the content, and also translating the technical terms can be challenging. That is, I would find at least three trustful sources to ensure that I understand the meaning of the technical terms and how people usually translate these technical terms into Traditional Chinese. Web technology changes so quickly that sometimes there is no even a sole and correct translation. In my previous report, I set the goal to translate for the topics of HTML and CSS because I thought that writing in my primary language is not a problem, but the progress was slower than I expected. In fact, I edited my works many times to modify the tone and change the words to illustrate the topics in different ways. 

Additionally, Kittur and Kraut (2008) noted that "it can reduce coordination needs, lead to shared mental models or provide a framework into which contributions can be embedded, allowing a larger number of editors to aggregate their efforts towards a common goal more efficiently" (p. 40). On the platform of MDN web docs, they have set up your construct area and have arranged the paragraphs already. All the contributors need to do is to fill in the translated content corresponding to each paragraph. According to above mentioned, MDN uses the framework to reduce the cost of interactions between contributors.

Unfortunately, although I marked my translations as "needs reviews," they have not received any review yet. Also, surprisingly, it is hard for me to identify my works from the entire content if I did not check my recent docs activity. They look like they were already there for a long time. In my opinion, the style guideline and the theme of the website do work.

### Reference

1. Bryant, S. L., Forte, A., & Bruckman, A. (2005, November). Becoming Wikipedian: transformation of participation in a collaborative online encyclopedia. In Proceedings of the 2005 international ACM SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group work (pp. 1-10). ACM.
2. Crowston, K., & Fagnot, I. (2018). Stages of motivation for contributing user-generated content: A theory and empirical test. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 109, 89-101. 
3. Kittur, A., & Kraut, R. E. (2008, November). Harnessing the wisdom of crowds in wikipedia: quality through coordination. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work (pp. 37-46). ACM.
